---
layout: post
title:  "If We Were Vampires by Jason Isbell and the 400 Unit is the best love song"
date:   2024-10-23
categories: jekyll update lobster
---

Why I think “If We Were Vampires” by Jason Isbell and the 400 Unit is the best love song. (Lyrically Speaking, and please Jason, please don't be a bad person). 

The song opens with “It’s not the long flowing dress that you're in”, then shifts to the light coming off of the lover’s skin, her temperament, her hand, and her nails. Although Jason is saying I love you not because of the XYZ, in actuality he is sneakily listing all of the things that make her special. Some love songs treat the concept brashly, for example: “I am in love with the shape of you” or “Dear lord, when I get to heaven, please let me bring my man”. This is not a jab at the aforementioned songs, because different people interpret love differently, and the popularity of the aforementioned songs demonstrates that the listeners resonate with the songs. Subtlety though, is the beauty of If We Were Vampires. Love is subtle, complicated, and with some exceptions, difficult to come by. When you have it, it is the lighting in the bottle, the “only sunshine”. The reality of love in my opinion is like what Mulaney said in one of his specials, it is not really “tonight is the night and how we only have tonight”, but more mundane with an occasional blend of drama. It's more in the lines of "Tonight’s No Good, How About Wednesday?" He loves her because he likes the way she looks in her dress; because she is a little afraid of the dark and can consistently see through his bullshit, oh, and that one time she talked him off the roof. (Talk about a massive understatement that is masterfully done). Jason talks about love in a very subtle way in the song, but what he is talking about is not subtle at all. Also look at me for quoting an ex-addict while talking about the work from another ex-addict. 

On the note of mistakes, I want to highlight another phrase from the song: “Maybe we'll get forty years together”. Jason is implying that this love is not a high school sweetheart situation and he and his lover probably have fallen in and out of love multiple times before finding each other. This segments into the other genre of love songs - the break-up songs. For instance, Stick Season / Let Her Go. With break-up songs, they usually go down two ways: "I hope this pain's just passin' through - But I doubt it" or "Only know you love her when you let her go". Letting go or carrying on. Sometimes I absolutely think the best love songs are the sad ones, and sometimes I don't, and most times I don't. Love is messy, Jason is not shying away from this fact. Other than the aforementioned roof talk, in the verse he sings about going out to smoke on the sidewalk and “Laugh at all the lovers and their plans”. I like the metaphor lighting in the bottle a lot when it comes to love, it is undoubtedly beautiful and magical, but it also can be volatile and short-lived. The best love song should not be about being sad though, I think, because the majesty outshines the volatility. 

Then it’s the vampire metaphor. It’s so weird when a love song talks about not being able to become vampires so they can be lovers forever and this is the reason why he loves her. It goes to the idea that you won’t love something if it is always there. People don’t appreciate oxygen and sunlight unless they desperately need it. Jason, ever the realist, is saying the reason why I love you is because our days are numbered, and if we are lucky maybe we can spend 40 years together. 40 years is a long time, and the listeners know that, but he is saying 40 years is too short for lovers. It’s oxymoronic. 40 years is too short to love someone, but you cannot love someone forever since you will start to take them for granted. Jason knows the feeling of love, which many songs talk about, but Jason articulates it in a very roundabout way, that I don’t think a lot of love songs do. Afterall, what is more roundabout than the idea of love?
